---
layout: default
title: "Closet Space"
---

> Hofstadter's Law: It always takes longer than you expect, even when
> you take into account Hofstadter's Law.
>
> --Douglas Hofstadter

The idea that happiness is never permanent is concretely manifested in my closet.  I once moved
to a new place that had four times the closet space as my previous bedroom.  As you might have
guessed, the new closet was full within a year.  The same thing happens every time I get a
bigger hard drive or I find myself free from a weekly commitment.  In the case of my hard
drive, it's a big number of small things that fill it up.  With a bigger hard drive, I'll be a
little more lax about cleaning up files.  With my closet, I'll keep shirts a little longer, or
be less reluctant to get new shirts, or spend less time cleaning out the closet.  In the case
of time, I'll be less apt to say no to new commitments.

A problem with the tendency to fill up your closet is that you're constrained when moving to a
new bedroom with a smaller closet.  Likewise, if you never keep much money in savings, you'll
be constrained if there's an emergency.

There are countless "tasks" that can fully consume a person: reading the entire works of
Tolstoy, watching all episodes of the Simpsons, dusting the underside of every banister.  So we
have to be careful which battles you pick.  Every now and then, we might want to step back and
evaluate whether what we're doing is the most important thing we can be doing.

***

A chock-full closet is a bad thing.  A chock-full closet is tight, which makes it difficult to
take out and put in new clothes.  So, if you want to go through your closet a shirt at a time
to find out what you might want to throw out, it'd take significantly longer to do so if it
were 100% full than if it were 90% full.  This isn't just because the 100%-full closet has 10%
more shirts.  It's because looking at each shirt in the 100%-full might take twice as long as
the 90% full closet, meaning that while the 90% closet might take 90 minutes to go through, the
100% closet would take 200 minutes.

Likewise, if your daily schedule is completely full, you won't have much time to sit and think
about how you can reduce your workload or how you can get out of certain ruts.  So, if you're
working three jobs to make ends meet, then you don't have a lot of time to sit back and try to
figure out what you could cut to make ends meet.

The general principle here is that if your resources are completely consumed, you don't have
any wiggle room, and you can't spend resources to free up more resources.  In Computer Science,
this is called "thrashing", where your computer is spending all its system resources trying to
figure out how to free up its system resources.  It's also seen in automobile traffic, where if
there are twice as many cars on the highway, a person's commute-time likely be significantly
higher than twice as high.

***

One solution to the problem of a full closet is to get a bigger closet.  This is usually the
first solution I think of.  Perhaps a better solution, though, would be to figure out which of
my clothes are most important, and throw out some of the clothes of lesser importance.  Unless
I adopt this latter attitude, I'll simply need bigger and bigger closets.

I remember the first time I saw a computer with a "hard drive", I was amazed.  This was in
1990, and it was 50 megabytes of disk space.  I wondered why anyone would ever need so much
memory.  Until then, all my computer files were on diskettes, each holding half a megabyte.  I
had about 20 of them, 10 megabytes in all.  Over decades years later, my hard drive is now a
terabyte, which is *20,000* times as big as as the "virtually limitless" hard drive from 1990.
And I've still managed to fill it up.

Similarly, if you figure out a way to get a little more money, such as borrowing off a credit
card (for an individual), or issuing bonds (for a government), these tend to be pushed to their
limits, like having extra hard drive space.

***

This idea of consuming all available resources isn't new.  In 1866, the English economist
William Stanley Jevons noted this phenomenon.  For example, James Watt introduced his steam
engine in the latter half of the 18th, which made much more efficient use of coal than
previously existing engines.  Paradoxically, this new efficiency caused the rate of coal
consumption to *increase* rather than decrease.  The new steam engine made coal a cheaper power
source than earlier methods.  Power via coal became so cheap that steam engines began to
replace oxen, sails, and other non-coal-fired power sources.  So the total amount of coal
consumption went up, even though the amount of coal needed for any particular task went down.
This phenomenon --the introduction of a more efficient use of resources causing *more* of that
resource to be consumed-- is called the Jevons paradox.

***

There are two conclusions I can make here.  First is that evolution rarely had pressure for
organisms to have internal checks on using their resources.  Second, is that we should be aware
that this tendency to use up everything, though natural and sensible from an evolutionary
perspective, can often lead to a local optimum, so we should be aware of this natural tendency
and take active measures to prevent falling into a local optimum (e.g., by cleaning out our
closet *before* it gets completely full).
