---
layout: default
title: "The X Blog"
---

# the castle
#### 2017/04/05/22:15, Wednesday

In a story called The Library of Babel, Jorge Luis Borges describes an endless library filled
with books with seemingly random contents.  I view this as a thought-experiment in
combinatorics: Every 300-page book that has ever been or ever will be written sits on a shelf
somewhere in this library.

When we try to visualize it, the hypothetical size of Borges's library is staggering: The
number of rooms it must contain would be larger than the number represented by 1 followed by
100,000 zeroes.  It would be as if every subatomic particle in the universe had its own
universe with as many particles, and every particle in that universe had *its* own universe,
repeating this down 1,000 levels, and at the bottom, each subatomic particle was a room in this
enormous library.

In comparison, my construction is quite easy to imagine.  A castle with maybe a hundred million
rooms, though I haven't been able to count, with an intricate network of hallways connecting
them.  The castle is large, but by no means infinite.  It has so many rooms that no one has
been able to catalog all of them, though not for lack of trying.  The rooms vary in size.  Most
are the dimensions of a small bedroom, and many are little bigger than a closet.  I've seen
more than a few the size of an auditorium, though these are rather rare.

This castle is built into a mountain.  Most of the rooms are deep in the mountain's interior.
If the mountain were a perfect cone, which it is not, it would be a mile and a half tall and 3
miles wide.  The rooms and the tunnels and staircases connecting them --which take up more
space than the rooms themselves-- leave little space for the actual rock of the mountain, the
majority of which has been mined away over the centuries.

No one has found two rooms that are exactly alike, though some vary in minor details.  For
example, one room might contain 19th century hunting rifles surrounding a full-size taxidermied
African elephant.  An adjacent room might be otherwise identical except the stuffed elephant is
Indian.  But in general, the rooms vary significantly.  One enormous room larger than an
airplane hangar contains a full scale replica of a Saturn V rocket amid space suits and
operational Mars rovers.  Another closet-sized room contains nothing other than a single
monarch butterfly and a wall calendar.  Some rooms are pristine and a pleasant temperature,
others are filthy with polluted air and well below freezing.

There are two aspects every room has in common.  First, there is a plaque above the door
entering every room that has a seemingly random string of 20 letters.  This label seems to be
the room's identifier in some bizarre index.  Second, somewhere in every room there is a wall
calendar.

Finally, the tunnels connecting the rooms are each lined with moving walkways such that a
person may step out of one of the exits from one room and rapidly be whisked along over a mile
of conduits to the entrance of another room.

The connections between the rooms don't follow a simple pattern, but they are far from
arbitrary.  One can usually find a theme that any two connected rooms share.  The small room
with the monarch butterfly connects to rooms with other species of butterflies, and a larger
room with a wide variety of insects, and several others.

This castle has a team of "caretakers" who, as a group, zip from room-to-room with the task of
dusting the room, taking inventory, and, importantly, flipping the calendars on the wall to the
current month.  The team of caretakers is neither random nor systematic in the order in which
they visit the rooms.  The team of caretakers has existed for millennia, with new members
apprenticing and eventually replacing the old.  In a day, the team may visit several hundred
rooms.  Despite this, there are rooms that have not been visited for over a thousand years, and
which are buried in layers of dust.  (What process generates this dust is another mystery.)

The caretakers' task is to prevent dust from building too much, and some rooms accumulate dust
faster than others, which the caretakers have picked up on, and have duly modified their routes
in accordance.

The more rooms the caretakers try to maintain, the dustier those rooms become.  For several
thousand years, the caretakers kept a nearly even visitation schedule, which resulted in the
rooms being uniformly covered in a relatively thin layer of dust.

Better that some rooms are dust free and some very dusty, rather than every room having some
dust.  With this in mind, there were periods when the caretakers agreed to cordon off a small
fraction of the castle, only about 10,000 rooms, less than a percent of a percent of the total,
to be visited on a regular schedule.  These rooms were each visited several times a year for a
few decades.  But this came at the expense of the other rooms being completely neglected: time
kept marching, and the dust kept piling up ever higher.

Some speculate that the number of rooms in the castle has grown over the centuries, and that
the existing rooms become rearranged from time-to-time.  This is possible.  The walkways are
shut down every day after the caretakers have returned to their quarters for the evening.  The
caretakers are unable to venture far with the walkways out, so no one has been able to disprove
that another crew or some other agent meddles with the rooms[1].

Some speculate further that the castle started much smaller, with only a few thousand rooms.
If so, then a hundred years was enough time to clean each room many times.  A caretaker could
conceivably visit every room within their lifetime.  Now, a century goes by and only a fraction
of the rooms get cleaned.  Though the caretakers tend to be long-lived, it's inconceivable that
a caretaker living today could visit any more than a tenth of the total rooms.

The purpose of the calendars is to help keep records of when the room was last visited.
Another speculation is that rooms that have not been visited for a long time --a thousand years
or so-- become so filled with dust that the mysterious night crew completely repurposes them,
sometimes closing off all tunnels into the neglected room.  The caretakers, aware of this
possibility ever scramble to preserve what rooms they can.

***

And so it is with my memories of Brussels, which remains frozen as it was over a decade ago,
and my cousin who remains 5 years old, though she is no younger than myself.

They say that until the Renaissance, the collective scholarly knowledge of mankind was small
enough that a single person could absorb it all.  Was there ever such a point with mankind's
collective tacit knowledge?  Probably not.  Consider all the native detailed knowledge of flora
and fauna in different regions.  If there were such a point, then a person wouldn't benefit
much from being born much earlier because he'd already be on the cusp of human knowledge.

A person could learn almost every field, but it might take him 100 years, at which point, the
earlier fields would have advanced.  Some of the fundamentals would probably be the same,
though.  He would also probably forget a great deal, and, the way the human brain is
constructed, would probably be overly influenced by his current context.

Possibly, after a point, since a person has limited memory, a person would simply be in a
steady-state in a sense.  That is, he wouldn't remember his entire life, rather he'd keep
living the same period over and over again because he couldn't remember anything else[2].  Perhaps
Chimpanzees (or dogs) are like this too.  After a certain point, they simply relive the same
days over and over again, they get in a rut and become a (many-state) automaton.

![]({{ site.url }}/assets/coronaRadiata.gif "The Castle"){:width="600"}

[1] It's unlikely that there is another crew of caretakers during the day.  Though the likelihood
of two crews running into each other on any given day is similar to that for winning a
low-stakes lottery, after several centuries, the probability that they *won't* run into each
other becomes almost impossible.

[2] Bill Holstein once said that he can't remember anything new because, to do so, he'd have to
forget something he already knew, and, at his age (through a Darwinian process), almost
everything he knew was really important.

# immortal
#### 2017/04/06/22:17, Thursday

There is no such thing as a brain transplant.  By this, I don't mean that the technology
doesn't exist to transplant a person's brain to another person, though I don't think our
technology is at that point yet.  What I mean is that if I somehow transplanted my brain to
another body, this procedure wouldn't be a brain transplant.  It would be a *body* transplant.
After the operation, I would wake up in a new body, and presumably have to learn to use new
eyes, arms, and other sensors and activators.  In this sense, my body is part of my identity no
more than my car is.  Both are familiar machines that I've grown accustomed to, but my brain is
what is really *me*.  (Of course, one could apply similar reasoning to conclude that, since I'm
still *me* if you remove any single cell of my brain (and no others) that none of my brain is
actually me either.)

Let's assume that our minds are physical just like everything else in the universe.  To assume
otherwise would mean we'd have to address the interaction between the physical and the
non-physical, since brain damage and drugs show that physical processes can affect our minds.

That said, we are not our physical neurons, but the *patterns* that they encode.  Douglas
Hofstadter and Daniel Dennett describe a thought-experiment in which you replace your brain
cells, one at a time, with functionally-equivalent silicon circuits.  In this case,
"functionally-equivalent" means that the external physical behavior of your silicon brain is
identical to that of your biological brain.  So, without looking inside your skull, I wouldn't
be able to tell the version of you that had a silicon brain from the version of you with a
biological brain.  I might also ascribe consciousness to the silicon version of you for the
same reason that I ascribe consciousness to the biological version of you, which is that *I* am
the only thing in the universe that I truly know to be consciousness --I just extend this trait
to others because it's more parsimonious to do so.  We might also make an argument that from
*your* perspective the silicon brain is still you.  If we assume that, after a few days, we
re-replace the silicon circuits back with your original neurons, each modified to account for
the changes in the silicon circuits over that time (i.e., what they've learned), then we'll get
back to your brain, which (by the assumptions of the thought experiment) will be physically
identical to your brain as if we had never done the silicon replacement at all.  Your memories
of the experiences of past few days living as the "silicon brain" would be identical to your
memories had your biological brain experienced them.  At any rate, from an outside perspective
at least, what makes you *you* isn't your physical neurons, but the *patterns* and information
that those neurons encode.  The substrate --biological neuron or silicon circuit-- doesn't
matter.

Like virtually all concepts, the concept of "self" is merely an abstraction we throw on top of
the atoms, quarks, or strings of reality so that we can talk about macro-scale phenomena, where
macro-scale here means anything more than a handful of quarks, which is virtually everything in
our day-to-day existence.  And like all abstractions, we can find places where the abstraction
of "self" breaks down.  For example, suppose we perform the silicon-replacement thought
experiment as above, replacing one neuron at a time with functionally-equivalent silicon, but
after removing your biological neurons, we reassemble them into your brain in a copy of your
body.  Now, there are two *you*s.  You might say that the "neural" you is the real you, but
what if we used neurons instead of silicon in creating the brain of your first body?  Then each
copy would have equal claim of being the true self.  At least, both copies would *feel* and
believe the same about being the original you.  A full discussion of what constitutes one's
self warrants another essay!

Suppose you wanted to live forever.  Modern and future medicine might be able to replace your
hips or even your liver, but all body parts wear out, including neurons.  If I wanted to live
forever, not only would I have to occasionally "replace" parts of my body, but I'd have to
replace the neurons in my brain.  One way to do this would be to clone myself, as in Robert
Heinlein's "Time Enough for Love", then "upload" my thoughts, memories, etc. to my clone's
brain.  Theoretically, the cloned-me could be behaviorally identical to the old me, with the
exception that its joints wouldn't be as arthritic, and it'd be all around in better shape.

If "you" are the patterns encoded in your brain, living forever would mean ensuring that these
patterns continue.  So what are these patterns that make you *you*?  These patterns include
things like your beliefs, memories, habits of mind, values, and desires.  They also include
your worldview and your ontology for how you characterize the world.  For example, like many
Americans, I associate dogs and cats together more than I associate either with pigs.  In my
mind, dogs and cats are pets, and pigs produce meat.  This isn't true for all cultures, some of
which don't eat pigs, and some eat dogs.  Some of my associations have a more personal bias.
For example, I have a stronger association between cats and mosquitoes than I assume most other
people do, because I have fairly strong allergies to cats, and both cats and mosquitoes have
made otherwise pleasant occasions less so for me.

Where do these patterns come from?  These patterns have only two possible sources: genes and
environment.  Psychologists debate the general contribution of each of these.  We might gain
some perspective of the possible influence of genes by noting that our brains have on the order
of 10,000,000,000,000 synapses, while the part of our genome that encodes our brain can be
compressed to about 200,000,000 bits.  This gives about 50,000 synapses for every bit of our
brain's blueprints.  So, only so much can be encoded in our genes.  What about explicit
instruction (e.g., lectures and what we read)?  If we hear 100 words per minute for 12 hours
every day for 40 years, and we assume about 10 bits per word, this gives roughly 10,000,000,000
bits for natural language input, or about 1,000 synapses for every bit of natural language.
This is 50 times more than what our genes account for.  As to the question of what informs our
synapses, there are still many unaccounted for bits.  I suspect that genes and natural language
are only the tip of the iceberg, and the iceberg's underbelly is tacit knowledge learned
through observations and interactions with others and with the world around us.

One way to live forever would be to upload your consciousness to silicon.  But if that
preserves "you", then wouldn't it also preserve you if you could regenerate a new biological
brain and upload your thoughts and beliefs to it?  My claim is that the process of having kids
and raising them is doing something close to this.  But kids are hardly clones of their
parents.  There are more than a few examples of staunch Republicans raising children who go to
college and become radical leftists.  I claim that the belief systems that make us *us* get
stuck in ruts, and that kids are a way of resetting this.  I further claim that most of our
belief systems are deep and tacit, and that more measurable beliefs, such as political
leanings, are relatively superficial.  Therefore, kids allow us to retrain our belief systems.
By interacting with your kids, they copy the important parts of your beliefs and habits.

What do I mean that belief systems get caught in ruts?  One example is my addiction to Emacs.
During college, I learned to use the Emacs word-processor, and over the past 20 years, I've
gotten to the point where it's difficult for me to write prose or programs using any other
word-processor.  This was fine in the late 1990s, but Emacs is starting to become dated.  Emacs
uses a large number of arcane key-combinations, and these have become entrenched in my muscle
memory.  For example, pressing the "control" key at the same time as the "k" key deletes the
text from the cursor to the end of the line the cursor's on.  When I habitually type this while
composing an email in Gmail, it tries to create a link.  Maybe I ought not to upload the Emacs
key-combination habits to my clone.  My speaking accent has also crystallized into American
English, and if I were to move to another country, I would always mark myself as American every
time I spoke.  Maybe it'd make sense to let the new me speak without an accent.

I also have many outdated beliefs.  These are tacit, not explicit, so it's not as simple as
correcting a misunderstood fact.  For example, I was raised Catholic, but I am now Atheist.  To
this day, 25 years after my conversion, I'm still digging up beliefs that are rooted in
Catholicism.  For example, Catholicism believes in an afterlife and divine justice.  One
consequence of this is that a follower need not worry much about righting things while alive
because God will judge all things.  Another consequence of Catholicism's belief in an eternal
afterlife is that our time on Earth is mostly preparation for the afterlife, which at infinity
years vs. 80 odd years is what our existence is really about.

Many of my tacit beliefs and patterns need updating, but they're so interconnected that it's
difficult to change just one thing.  In Korea, there is a system of heating called "ondol"
which means warm stone.  Korea gets quite cold in the winter, and apartments are frequently
heated through floor heating.  One consequence of this is that many people spend a lot of time
on the floor of their homes.  People sleep on the floor and regularly sit on the floor during
meals.  No one wants to sit on a dirty floor, so it's custom to remove one's shoes immediately
when entering a home.  A consequence of *this* is that Korean shoes tend to be easy to slip on
and off.  Also Korea doesn't have as much need for home furniture like beds and kitchen chairs.
The point is that one pattern of behavior can become entrenched with others so that changing a
simple thing, like wearing Doctor Martin boots (which take a long time to lace up) would put
pressure to change many other behaviors.

These sorts of behaviors exist on a family-sized scale as well.  It wasn't until I was in my
late teens before I realized that my own family has a custom not shared by everyone.  It's
about dealing with trash in the car.  My parents never explicitly told me all the rules of the
custom, but this is how they (and now I) deal with trash while driving: keep a durable plastic
bag of a particular shape and size hooked on the gear shift and hanging to the passenger side.
These bags might be the sturdy bags you might get at a gift shop.  When you stop for gas, empty
the bag into the gas station trash, but keep the bag.  Why keep it?  Because they're hard to
come by.  Why not just use a regular grocery plastic bag?  The shape of the holes on these bags
are such that they hang so that it's difficult to put trash into with one hand while driving.
Since you keep these bags a long time, you don't want to put trash into them that might stink
up the car.  For example, you can't just put an apple core into it.  Instead wrap the apple
core in multiple tissues before putting it in the bag.  Again, this is a small coherent system
(and also an example of a tacitly passed habit).

Why is it hard to change beliefs?  When learning, we build things in terms of concepts we
already know.  It becomes difficult to change an underlying concept with so much built on top
of it.  I've heard that there exist some nuclear power plants that still have 1950s control
systems, with 1960s controllers on top of those, and even more modern control built on top of
those.  The issue is that you can't take the plant offline to unplug the controller.  You have
to start with a clean slate!

We can get another view of why a "reset" might be necessary by considering what it would mean
to live for centuries.  For example, consider the scars a 10,000 year old man might have.  Over
the course of several hundred years, one is sure to break some bones and break their skin.
Both of these would become filled with scars in the same way that the surface of the moon is
pocked with scars from eons of asteroid strikes.  These are only the scars we can see.  Surely,
entropy would make its mark on that person's internal organs.

And what about his cognitive state?  Is there some sort of local optimum or cognitive aging
analogous to memory leaks in computers, where the most practical solution is to reboot?  You're
a different person than you were 20 years ago.  Imagine if you lived for thousands of years.
Would you reach a fixed-point, or would you continually change depending on your context.  If
it's the latter, then like the ship of Theseus, even the patterns that make you *you* might be
replaced such that the set of patterns that comprise you at one time are completely disjoint
from your "pattern set" at some time in the future.  At this point, you might say that *you*
are some meta-pattern that holds constant during that span.

If you lived for thousands of years, would you notice patterns that can't be seen otherwise, or
is cultural transmission powerful enough to find these patterns?  For example, written and oral
history allows historians to find trends in empires that span centuries.  On the other hand,
firsthand experience is often difficult to replace, and no one had firsthand knowledge of the
entire Roman Empire.  Even if a person could live long enough, he couldn't be present at all
events, as important events often took place simultaneously hundreds of miles apart.

Main points:
- We are patterns.
- We can upload these patterns to other systems, including computers and other people.
- People can acquire mental cruft, so "rebooting" has an upside.
- Our kids capture the fundamentals of our patterns, not the specifics.
- The bulk of our patterns are tacit, and are learned through years of observations and
  interactions, as opposed to explicitly taught knowledge.

Conclusions:

1. In a sense, an adult is a being thousands of years old, or has nearly the same
Weltanschauung as if he lived for thousands of years.  Conversely, figures from antiquity, such
as Marcus Aurelius are still living, though distributed among millions of cognitive
descendants.

2. You can upload your thoughts to other people, your kids just naturally learn from you, so
are a first candidate.  Isaac Newton died childless, yet his ideas live on.

***

#### Addendum 2017/05/12/20:19

I got a new computer today and spent more time than I should have transferring my files from
one computer to the other.  The hardware wasn't exactly the same, so a rote copy wouldn't work.
I had to monitor the files a little.  I was surprised at how much "cruft" had built up in my
old computer.  I didn't copy most of this to the new computer.


# Test foo
#### 2018/06/09/22:13, Saturday

test
